README.md, before:

# Hibiscus Sense ESP32 Arduino Tutorial

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-logo.png" width="300"></a></p>
<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense.png" width="400"></a></p>

## Table of Content
- [Introduction](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#introduction)
- [Hibiscus Sense Features](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#hibiscus-sense-features)
- [Hibiscus Sense Pinout Diagram](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#hibiscus-sense-pinout-diagram)
- [Learning Material Preparation](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#learning-material-preparation)
- [Interfacing Hibiscus to Computer's USB Port](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#interfacing-hibiscus-to-computers-usb-port)
- [Tutorial 1: Control Blue LED on GPIO2](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#tutorial-1-control-blue-led-on-gpio2)

## Introduction

[Hibiscus Sense](https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/) is an Internet of Things (IoT) development board, powered by the mighty and popular dual-core [ESP32](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/socs/esp32) microcontroller, which on-board equipped with:
- 3 sensors:
  - **APDS9960**: an environment sensor, which sense *proximity, RGB* and *gesture*.
  - **BME280**: an environment sensor, which sense the *altitude, barometric pressure, humidity* and *temperature*.
  - **MPU6050**: 6-axis motion tracking sensor, which sense *3-axis gravitational acceleration, 3-axis rotational velocity* and *temperature*.
- 3 actuators:
  - **Buzzer**: short distance small buzzer.
  - **LED**: blue LED.
  - **RGB LED**: WS2812 RGB LED.

Comes with **USB Type-C** to powered the board with 5V and to program the ESP32 microcontroller, which on-board has USB-to-Serial converter **Silicon Labs CP2104** with **automatic bootloader reset**, so we don’t have to press the RESET button each time to upload the program into the microcontroller.

Despite, we can program ESP32 using other programming language and it's tools, in this tutorial we will focus on using [Arduino](https://www.arduino.cc/) as the learning and prototyping platform.

## Hibiscus Sense Features

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-features.png" width="900"></a></p>

## Hibiscus Sense Pinout Diagram

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-pinout.png" width="900"></a></p>

- **Blue LED** is connected to `GPIO2` ESP32 microcontroller.
- **Small Buzzer** is connected to `GPIO13` ESP32 microcontroller.
- **WS2812 RGB LED** is connected to `GPIO16` ESP32 microcontroller.
- All GPIO can generate digital input/output (3.3V) and PWM signal output, except `GPIO34-GPIO39` because it is an input pin only.
- ESP32 `VSPI` is complete **MISO** `GPIO19`, **MOSI** `GPIO32`, **CLK** `GPIO18` and **CS** `GPIO5`.
- ESP32 `I2C` **SDA** `GPIO21` and **SCL** `GPIO22`, without pullup resistor.
- **Sensors**: **APDS9960**, **BME280** and **MPU6050** interfaced to the `I2C` ESP32 microcontroller, respectively I2C address: `0x39`, `0x77` and `0x68`.
- Avoid to use `ADC2` channel while using WiFi.
- Each GPIO absolute maximum current drawn only 16mA.
- Board measurement including header in mm: 58.7 x 27 x 13.3 (length x width x height).
- Package measurement in mm: 71.8 x 35.5 x 20.4 (length x width x height).

## Learning Material Preparation

Prior to start learning to control the actuators and acquire data from the sensors on Hibiscus Sense using Arduino programming tool and language, we have to make sure all learning material is ready, as below:
1. Hibiscus Sense and a USB cable Type-A to Type-C _(suppose your computer only have Type-C USB port, you can also use USB cable Type-C to Type-C)_. If you don't have one, you are always welcome to purchase it from [Myduino](https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/)
2. A computer with Arduino IDE installed, if you don't have it please download it from here: [Windows](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-windows.exe) / Linux [32-bit](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linux32.tar.xz), [64-bit](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linux64.tar.xz), [ARM 32-bits](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linuxarm.tar.xz) [ARM 64-bits](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linuxaarch64.tar.xz) / [Mac OSX](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-macosx.zip) and install it on your computer.
3. [Arduino-ESP32](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32) hardware library installed. Below is screenshot, showing the `Arduino IDE Boards Manager` (Arduino IDE Menu: **_Tools > Board:"_________" > Boards Manager..._**) which already have esp32 hardware library `INSTALLED`. If you don't have it, please follow this [instruction](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/blob/master/docs/arduino-ide/boards_manager.md) to install it.
<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/arduino-ide-hardware-library-esp32.png" width="600"></a></p>

## Interfacing Hibiscus to Computer's USB Port

Connect the USB cable Type-C to Hibiscus Sense and Type-A to our computer. Hibiscus Sense comes with preset program to test on-board actuators and sensors, should be by now we'll see the buzzer is buzzing, the RGB LED changing colors, the blue LED blinking and the reading of sensors at Serial Monitor (we have to open the Arduino IDE Serial Monitor to see the data). Suppose, you didn't see any reaction on the board you can contact Mr. Ariffin via [WhatsApp](https://api.whatsapp.com/send?phone=60177875232&text=Hi%20Mr.%20Ariffin,%20please%20help.%20My%20Hibiscus%20Sense,%20seems%20not%20working%20for%20the%20first%20time.) for help.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-first-time.gif" width="600"></a></p>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-first-time-monitor.gif" width="600"></a></p>

## Tutorial 1: Control Blue LED on GPIO2 (Strobe Light Effect)

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-exercise-one.png" width="400"></a></p>

There is 1x blue LED labelled as `LED` on-board, as circled on the image above. The circuit of this LED is an **active-low circuit**, as shown in the schematic below, which the negative (-ve) terminal of this LED is connected to GPIO2, therefore we have to pull the GPIO2 to LOW state, in order to complete the circuit, then the light of the LED will turn ON. Otherwise, by pulling the GPIO2 to HIGH state, the light of the LED will turn OFF.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/schematic-exercise-one.png" width="150"></a></p>
 
This is quite unusual behaviour, but it is good to learn how an electronic circuit could behave either way. Whereas, the usual circuit design was **active-high circuit**, where the positive (+ve) terminal of the LED connected to the GPIO2, as in the schematic below, instead of the negative (-ve) terminal of the LED connected to GPIO2, as in the schematic above. According to this type of circuit, we need to pull GPIO2 to HIGH state, to turn ON the LED, otherwise pull GPIO2 to LOW state, to turn OFF the LED.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/schematic-exercise-one-a.png" width="150"></a></p>

Since, the blue LED circuit on Hibiscus Sense is active-low, we will program it as below:

**Complete Sketch**
```
void setup() {
  pinMode(2, OUTPUT); // declaring GPIO2 as an OUTPUT pin.

}

void loop() {
  // stobe light effect, such on the aeroplane.
  digitalWrite(2, LOW);
  delay(100);
  digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
  delay(100);

  digitalWrite(2, LOW);
  delay(100);
  digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
  delay(2000);
}
```

**Detail Code Explanations**

The LED is connected to `GPIO2`, which we need to configure GPIO2 as `OUTPUT`.
```
pinMode(2, OUTPUT);
```

In the void loop() function, the program start by turning the LED ON, as the ciruit is active-low, we use `LOW` state on GPIO2 to complete the LED circuit. Then delay() function to pause the program in milliseconds. Vice versa to turn OFF the LED.
```
digitalWrite(2, LOW);
delay(100);
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
delay(100);

digitalWrite(2, LOW);
delay(100);
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
delay(2000);
```

Now, upload the complete sketch to ESP32, then observe the output. By oversation, the output signal of the LED only have 2 states, which are ON and OFF, thus this output signal is what we called, as **`DIGITAL OUTPUT`**.

**Interesting facts!** The LED output of the program is actually, an example of strobe light, which we saw on an airplane during the night.

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/image-exercise-one.gif" width="300"></a></p>

## Tutorial 2: Control Blue LED on GPIO2 (Glowing Light)

In this tutorial, we will use the same blue LED in Tutorial 1, then only changes happen in this tutorial are the program will be replace for an output of glowing light effect, as the image shown below. Where the blue LED color will start from OFF and slowly glowing until it reach maximum light ON and turn OFF again and repeat the process again and again.

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/image-exercise-two.gif" width="300"></a></p>

As we know, the output signal from Tutorial 1 is `DIGITAL OUTPUT`, where the output signal is either turn ON or turn OFF, but to achieve glowing light effect, we cannot rely on digital output signal program anymore. Therefore we need a signal that can varies range of output signal from minimum to maximum value. What we need is Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM), whereas the signal output that has been generated by PWM, we also called it as **`ANALOG OUTPUT`**.

Fortunately, ESP32 microcontroller have 16 channels of independent PWM controller, which can be configured to generate PWM signal on all GPIOs available on ESP32, except GPIO34 to GPIO39.

Commit message:

add image and edit source code

README.md, after:

# Hibiscus Sense ESP32 Arduino Tutorial

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-logo.png" width="300"></a></p>
<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense.png" width="400"></a></p>

> Whenever you are thinking of quick IoT hardware prototyping / development, just grab **Hibiscus Sense** and right away focus on programming.

## Table of Content
- [Introduction](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#introduction)
- [Hibiscus Sense Features](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#hibiscus-sense-features)
- [Hibiscus Sense Pinout Diagram](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#hibiscus-sense-pinout-diagram)
- [Learning Material Preparation](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#learning-material-preparation)
- [Interfacing Hibiscus to Computer's USB Port](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#interfacing-hibiscus-to-computers-usb-port)
- [Tutorial 1: Control Blue LED on GPIO2](https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense-arduino#tutorial-1-control-blue-led-on-gpio2)

## Introduction

[Hibiscus Sense](https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/) is a rapid Internet of Things (IoT) development board, powered by the mighty and popular dual-core [ESP32](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/socs/esp32) microcontroller, which on-board equipped with rich profusion sensor's data and basic actuators as below:
- 3 sensors:
  - **APDS9960**: an environment sensor, which sense *proximity, RGB* and *gesture*.
  - **BME280**: an environment sensor, which sense the *altitude, barometric pressure, humidity* and *temperature*.
  - **MPU6050**: 6-axis motion tracking sensor, which sense *3-axis gravitational acceleration, 3-axis rotational velocity* and *temperature*.
- 3 actuators:
  - **Buzzer**: short distance small buzzer.
  - **LED**: blue LED.
  - **RGB LED**: WS2812 RGB LED.

Hibiscus Sense, comes with **USB Type-C** to power up the board (5V supply from the computer's USB) and to program the ESP32 microcontroller. On-board also has USB-to-Serial converter **Silicon Labs CP2104** with **automatic bootloader reset**, so we don’t have to press the RESET button each time to upload the program into the microcontroller.

Despite, we can program ESP32 using other programming language and it's tools, in this tutorial we will focus on using [Arduino](https://www.arduino.cc/) as the learning and prototyping platform.

## Hibiscus Sense Features

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-features.png" width="900"></a></p>

## Hibiscus Sense Pinout Diagram

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-pinout.png" width="900"></a></p>

- **Blue LED** is connected to `GPIO2` ESP32 microcontroller.
- **Small Buzzer** is connected to `GPIO13` ESP32 microcontroller.
- **WS2812 RGB LED** is connected to `GPIO16` ESP32 microcontroller.
- All GPIO can generate digital input/output (3.3V) and PWM signal output, except `GPIO34-GPIO39` because it is an input pin only.
- ESP32 `VSPI` is complete **MISO** `GPIO19`, **MOSI** `GPIO32`, **CLK** `GPIO18` and **CS** `GPIO5`.
- ESP32 `I2C` **SDA** `GPIO21` and **SCL** `GPIO22`, without pullup resistor.
- **Sensors**: **APDS9960**, **BME280** and **MPU6050** interfaced to the `I2C` ESP32 microcontroller, respectively I2C address: `0x39`, `0x77` and `0x68`.
- Avoid to use `ADC2` channel while using WiFi.
- Each GPIO absolute maximum current drawn only 16mA.
- Board measurement including header in mm: 58.7 x 27 x 13.3 (length x width x height).
- Package measurement in mm: 71.8 x 35.5 x 20.4 (length x width x height).

## Learning Material Preparation

Prior to start learning to control the actuators and acquire data from the sensors on Hibiscus Sense using Arduino programming tool and language, we have to make sure all learning material is ready, as below:
1. Hibiscus Sense and a USB cable Type-A to Type-C _(suppose your computer only have Type-C USB port, you can also use USB cable Type-C to Type-C)_. If you don't have one, you are always welcome to purchase it from [Myduino](https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/)
2. A computer with Arduino IDE installed, if you don't have it please download it from here: [Windows](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-windows.exe) / Linux [32-bit](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linux32.tar.xz), [64-bit](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linux64.tar.xz), [ARM 32-bits](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linuxarm.tar.xz) [ARM 64-bits](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-linuxaarch64.tar.xz) / [Mac OSX](https://downloads.arduino.cc/arduino-1.8.13-macosx.zip) and install it on your computer.
3. [Arduino-ESP32](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32) hardware library installed. Below is screenshot, showing the `Arduino IDE Boards Manager` (Arduino IDE Menu: **_Tools > Board:"_________" > Boards Manager..._**) which already have esp32 hardware library `INSTALLED`. If you don't have it, please follow this [instruction](https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/blob/master/docs/arduino-ide/boards_manager.md) to install it.
<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/arduino-ide-hardware-library-esp32.png" width="600"></a></p>

## Interfacing Hibiscus to Computer's USB Port

Connect the USB cable Type-C to Hibiscus Sense and Type-A to our computer. Hibiscus Sense comes with preset program to test on-board actuators and sensors, should be by now we'll see the buzzer is buzzing, the RGB LED changing colors, the blue LED blinking and the reading of sensors at Serial Monitor (we have to open the Arduino IDE Serial Monitor to see the data). Suppose, you didn't see any reaction on the board you can contact Mr. Ariffin via [WhatsApp](https://api.whatsapp.com/send?phone=60177875232&text=Hi%20Mr.%20Ariffin,%20please%20help.%20My%20Hibiscus%20Sense,%20seems%20not%20working%20for%20the%20first%20time.) for help.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-first-time.gif" width="600"></a></p>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-first-time-monitor.gif" width="600"></a></p>

## Tutorial 1: Control Blue LED on GPIO2 (Strobe Light Effect)

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/hibiscus-sense-exercise-one.png" width="400"></a></p>

There is 1x blue LED labelled as `LED` on-board, as circled on the image above. The circuit of this LED is an **active-low circuit**, as shown in the schematic below, which the negative (-ve) terminal of this LED is connected to GPIO2, therefore we have to pull the GPIO2 to LOW state, in order to complete the circuit, then the light of the LED will turn ON. Otherwise, by pulling the GPIO2 to HIGH state, the light of the LED will turn OFF.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/schematic-exercise-one.png" width="150"></a></p>
 
This is quite unusual behaviour, but it is good to learn how an electronic circuit could behave either way. Whereas, the usual circuit design was **active-high circuit**, where the positive (+ve) terminal of the LED connected to the GPIO2, as in the schematic below, instead of the negative (-ve) terminal of the LED connected to GPIO2, as in the schematic above. According to this type of circuit, we need to pull GPIO2 to HIGH state, to turn ON the LED, otherwise pull GPIO2 to LOW state, to turn OFF the LED.

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/schematic-exercise-one-a.png" width="150"></a></p>

Since, the blue LED circuit on Hibiscus Sense is active-low, we will program it as below:

**Complete Sketch**
```
void setup() {
  pinMode(2, OUTPUT); // declaring GPIO2 as an OUTPUT pin.

}

void loop() {
  // stobe light effect, such on the aeroplane.
  digitalWrite(2, LOW);
  delay(100);
  digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
  delay(100);

  digitalWrite(2, LOW);
  delay(100);
  digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
  delay(2000);
}
```

**Detail Code Explanations**

The LED is connected to `GPIO2`, which we need to configure GPIO2 as `OUTPUT`.
```
pinMode(2, OUTPUT);
```

In the void loop() function, the program start by turning the LED ON, as the ciruit is active-low, we use `LOW` state on GPIO2 to complete the LED circuit. Then delay() function to pause the program in milliseconds. Vice versa to turn OFF the LED.
```
digitalWrite(2, LOW);
delay(100);
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
delay(100);

digitalWrite(2, LOW);
delay(100);
digitalWrite(2, HIGH);
delay(2000);
```

Now, upload the complete sketch to ESP32, then observe the output. By oversation, the output signal of the LED only have 2 states, which are ON and OFF, thus this output signal is what we called, as **`DIGITAL OUTPUT`**.

**Interesting facts!** The LED output of the program is actually, an example of strobe light, which we saw on an airplane during the night.

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/image-exercise-one.gif" width="300"></a></p>

## Tutorial 2: Control Blue LED on GPIO2 (Glowing Light Effect)

In this tutorial, we will use the same blue LED in Tutorial 1, then only changes happen in this tutorial are the program will be replace for an output of glowing light effect, as the image shown below. Where the blue LED color will start from OFF and slowly glowing until it reach maximum light ON and turn OFF again and repeat the process again and again.

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/image-exercise-two.gif" width="300"></a></p>

As we know, the output signal from Tutorial 1 is `DIGITAL OUTPUT`, where the output signal is either turn ON or turn OFF, but to achieve glowing light effect, we cannot rely on digital output signal anymore. Therefore we need a signal that has ranges of output signal from minimum to maximum value. What we need is the Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM), whereas the signal output that has been generated by the PWM, most of us also called it as **`ANALOG OUTPUT`**, despite it is not a true sine wave analog output. PWM is a modulation technique which generates variable-width pulses of digital signal (square wave), which in average over time, representing analog output signal, as shown in the image below.

<p align="center"><a href="https://myduino.com/product/myd-036/"><img src="https://github.com/myinvent/hibiscus-sense/raw/main/references/image-exercise-two-a.gif" width="400"></a></p>

Fortunately, ESP32 microcontroller have 16 channels of independent PWM controller, which can be configured to generate PWM signal on all GPIOs available on ESP32, except GPIO34 to GPIO39.
